#Source/Literature/Spiritual/Śrī-Cāṇakya-Nīti/1/2 

अधीत्येदं यथाशास्त्रं नरो जानाति सत्तमः ।
धर्मोपदेशविख्यातं कार्याकार्यं शुभाशुभम् ॥२॥

*adhītyedaṁ yathā-śāstraṁ 
naro jānāti sattamaḥ 
dharmopadeśa-vikhyātaṁ 
kāryākāryaṁ śubhāśubham*

**A person is most excellent who, through a study of these scriptural precepts obtained from various śāstras, acquires an understanding of these principles of dharma, and thereby understands what is to be followed and what is not to be followed.**

Commentary: 
Here Cāṇakya Paṇḍita demonstrates that in order to be rightly called “the śāstra of common sense,” nīti-śāstra must eventually lead to dharma-śāstra, pursuance of spiritual goals. It follows therefore that a life void of religious understanding is a life that is bereft of common sense. The second verse underscores the first.

Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, declares in the Bhagavad-gītā, cātur-varṇyaṁ mayā sṛṣṭam, “I alone created the fourfold divisions of society.” Certain duties apply to each level of society. Brāhmaṇas, who are the head of society, conduct yajñas and offer spiritual guidance to the other members. Kṣatriyas, the kings and warriors, are the administrators, protectors and enforcers of law and order. Vaiśyas, members of the mercantile class, protect cows, run the farms and engage in commerce. Śūdras are the working class. Whereas each class has its own regulations that apply to that class alone, nīti-śāstra is meant for all classes. From householders to renunciants, it has something for everybody. Hence nīti-śāstra being common to all mankind, is “common sense.” In this verse Cāṇakya Paṇḍita says that those who master these principles will come to the stage of dharma, or Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Kalau śūdra-sambhavaḥ: here and now in Kali-yuga when practically everyone is born a śūdra and are thus lacking in every form of common sense, the urgency for Śrī Cāṇakya-nīti is magnified.

Śrīla Prabhupāda states in the introduction to his Bhagavad-gītā As It Is that dharma means “that which sustains.” He writes:

> Now a particular religious faith may have some beginning in the history of human society, but sanātana-dharma lies outside of history, for it belongs to the living beings who have no birth and who never die. 
> 
> Let us try to understand this eternal religion from the Sanskrit verbal root dhṛ, which means ‘to sustain.’ Therefore dharma is that quality which remains always and which cannot be taken away. When we speak of fire it is concluded that light and heat will be there. Otherwise we cannot call it fire. In a similar way, we must find the constant companion of the eternal being: that eternal part or quality is his religion, his dharma.

True dharma, our loving relationship with God, is our sustenance. To find our relationship with Him is the highest common sense.

Sanātana-dharma is the essence of the soul and, like the soul, is everlasting. Cāṇakya Paṇḍita directs us towards the all-harmonizing “eternal religion” of spirit as distinguished from the material or divisive “religions” created by man. Although our original dharma is ever-present within our heart of hearts, our loving link to the Lord has been covered due to māyā (illusory material energy) and temporary “dharmas.” The eternal religion locked within the spiritual particle or soul is nothing less than the dormant desire to actively engage in loving devotional service unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Our eternal constitutional position is one of loving service to God, yet our present infatuation with temporary sense enjoyment or material dharmas has covered the natural function of the soul. Cāṇakya Paṇḍita advises us to learn what is to be done and what is not to be done, keeping in mind that the fruits of our deeds are meant for the pleasure of the Supreme Lord alone. The enlightened devotee’s material duties coincide with his eternal dharma. Simple for the simple yet complex for the crooked, this plain advice is easy to understand for the humble devotee, but impossible for the atheistic materialist. Although such a person claims to be following doctrines which he mistakes for dharma, he is actually an opportunist ready to bend nature to his every whim.