#Source/Literature/Spiritual/Śrī-Cāṇakya-Nīti/1/4 

मूर्खशिष्योपदेशेन दुष्टस्त्रीभरणेन च । 
दुःखितैः सम्प्रयोगेण पण्डितोऽप्यवसीदति ॥४॥

*mūrkha-śiṣyopadeśena 
duṣṭa-strī-bharaṇena ca 
duḥkhitaiḥ samprayogeṇa 
paṇḍito ’py avasīdati* 

**Even a learned paṇḍita suffers by instructing a foolish disciple, by maintaining a wicked wife and by association with the wretched.** 

Commentary: 
The origin of this śloka is Bṛhaspati-nīti-sāra, a section of the Garuḍa Purāṇa. (GP 1.108.4) This Bṛhaspati-nīti-sāra incidentally was conveyed by Bṛhaspati, the priest of the devas, to Lord Indra the king of Svarga, after he defeated an army of demons in battle. The rarity of śāstric lessons should be appreciated. Indra had to emerge victorious from a terrible war to receive this fruit of knowledge which today is freely available thanks to the pioneering efforts of Śrīla Prabhupāda. 

The transmission of knowledge from a genuine spiritual master to a proper student is illustrated with the following comparison: If a husband is potent and his wife is fertile, then if there is coition, there will be a pregnancy. Similarly, transmission of knowledge is not the sole responsibility of the guru. As Cāṇakya Paṇḍita will demonstrate, a disciple must qualify himself through faithful service to his guru mahārāja. Only then will Śrī Guru permit the transmission of knowledge. 

The Manu-saṁhitā advises:
> A spiritual master should not wholesale his knowledge unasked, nor even convey his learning to those who ask improperly. It is better to remain as a dumb man and die with his knowledge than for a sage to sow seeds in a saline field. (MS 2.110–113)

Today it has become fashionable for many celebrities to keep some self-appointed New Age guru around like a trained, well-groomed dog. Cāṇakya Paṇḍita illustrates why such sycophantic relationships are unproductive. He who wants to be cheated will obtain his desire when an imposter guru arrives at his door. Was not Rāvaṇa clad in the saffron dress of a sādhu when he abducted Sītā? Unless both the disciple and guru are genuine, any pretense of following dharma will be a farce. 

Regarding association with the wretched, Bhartṛhari states in his Nīti-śataka: 

> A man is like a drop of water. On a stove, the water evaporates. Sitting upon the lotus leaf, it glistens in the sun. But if a drop of water enters an oyster under the influence of the Svātī star, it becomes a pearl. (NS 66) 

Similarly one’s character is influenced by his associates. Cāṇakya Paṇḍita’s advice that we choose our friends wisely should be taken to heart if we want to live happily. The useless society of worldly men destroys all good qualities. Conversely there is no fellowship like the company of genuine sādhus, devotees of the Lord. Regarding Cāṇakya Paṇḍita’s tidbit about a wicked wife, Śukrācārya says: 

> Begging and death are better than being a householder with a bad wife. (SN 3.288)