#Source/Literature/Spiritual/Śrī-Cāṇakya-Nīti/1/5 
#Topics/Chastity #Topics/Chastity/unchaste-wife #Topics/Friends #Topics/Friends/false-friends #Topics/Servant 
 
दुष्टा भार्या शठं मित्रं भृत्यश्चोत्तरदायकः । 
ससर्पे च गृहे वासो मृत्युरेव न संशयः ॥५॥

*duṣṭā bhāryā śaṭhaṁ mitraṁ 
bhṛtyaś cottara-dāyakaḥ 
sa-sarpe ca gṛhe vāso 
mṛtyur eva na saṁśayaḥ* 

**An unchaste wife, a false friend, an insolent servant, and living with a poisonous serpent in the house are nothing but death.** 

Commentary: 
He who lays trust in mundane friendship is as foolish as the man from Kerala who died after a month in a cage with cobras while trying to get his name into the Guinness Book of World Records. A man is judged by his company, just as a guru is judged by the quality of his disciples, or parents by their offspring. Whomsoever we associate with, marry or accept service from hinges upon our power of discrimination. Cāṇakya Paṇḍita repeats this śloka from Bṛhaspati-nīti-sāra. (GP 1.108.25) 

Śrīla Prabhupāda dilated on this verse during a lecture in San Francisco on 16 July 1975 from Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 6.1.31: 

> So this Ajāmila, he was dāsī-pati. He was a husband of a prostitute. So he was not happy. He was attached. Another thing is … That is also Cāṇakya Paṇḍita. He says, duṣṭā bhāryā, means this prostitute. She who is polluted by another man is called duṣṭā. Strīṣu duṣṭāsu varṇa-saṅkaraḥ abhibhavāt. Therefore human civilization must be very careful that the women may not become polluted. Strīṣu duṣṭāsu. Duṣṭā means she is not satisfied with husband. She wants new, new. That is called duṣṭā. So Cāṇakya Paṇḍita says, duṣṭā bhāryā: “If the wife is duṣṭā, duṣṭā bhāryā śaṭhaṁ mitram, and friend is śaṭham, hypocrite, talking very friendly, but he has got something, design …” That is called śaṭhaṁ mitram. Śaṭham means hypocrite. So “If somebody’s wife is duṣṭā and friend is hypocrite, duṣṭā bhāryā śaṭhaṁ mitraṁ bhṛtyaś cottara-dāyakaḥ, and bhṛtya, servant, does not obey, he argues with the master …” Master says, “Why did you not do?” “Oh, I am this …” No argument. Bhṛtya should be very silent. Then he is faithful servant. Sometimes master may be angry, but bhṛtya should be silent. Then master becomes kind. But if he replies on equal level, oh, then it is very bad. Duṣṭā bhāryā śaṭhaṁ mitraṁ bhṛtyaś cottara-dāyakaḥ, sa-sarpe ca gṛhe vāso: “And you are living in a apartment where there is a snake.” So if these four things are there or one of them, not all the fours, then mṛtyur eva na saṁśayaḥ: “Then you are doomed. You are doomed. Your life is spoiled.”