#Source/Literature/Spiritual/Śrī-Cāṇakya-Nīti/1/1 

प्रणम्य शिरसा विष्णुं त्रैलोक्याधिपतिं प्रभुम् । 
नानाशास्त्रोद्धृतं वक्ष्ये राजनीतिसमुच्चयम् ॥१॥ 

*praṇamya śirasā viṣṇuṁ* 
*trailokyādhipatiṁ prabhum* 
*nānā-śāstroddhṛtaṁ vakṣye* 
*rāja-nīti-samuccayam* 

**Bowing my head before the overlord of the three worlds and master of all, the all-pervasive Viṣṇu, I now recite maxims selected from various śāstras pertaining to political ethics.** 

Commentary: 
As stated by our eternal spiritual master, His Divine Grace A. C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupāda, in his commentary on Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (3.1.10, purport):

> In modern times Cāṇakya Paṇḍita is considered the authority in good counsel and political and moral instruction. 

Following the example of all great Vaiṣṇava sages, the renowned paṇḍita begins his collection of verses on the subject of common sense with due salutations unto Lord Viṣṇu, the Triloka-pati or “lord of the three worlds.” 

Regarding worship of Lord Viṣṇu as transcendent to this material world, Śrīla Prabhupāda gives the following quote in the introduction to the eleventh chapter of the Sixth Canto of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam: 

> If one is a devotee of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord Viṣṇu, and depends on Lord Viṣṇu in every respect, then victory, opulence and peace of mind are all inevitably available. Such a person has nothing for which to aspire in the three worlds. The Supreme Lord is so kind that He especially favors such a devotee by not giving him opulence that will hamper his devotional service. Therefore I wish to give up everything for the service of the Lord. I wish always to chant the glories of the Lord and engage in His service. Let me become unattached to my worldly family and make friendships with the devotees of the Lord. I do not desire to be promoted to the higher planetary systems, even to Dhruvaloka or Brahmaloka, nor do I desire an unconquerable position within this material world. I have no need for such things. 

Lord Viṣṇu is a four-armed expansion—or plenary portion—of Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Lord Kṛṣṇa is identified as the Supreme Lord throughout the Vedic literature, as confirmed by Śrīla Vyāsadeva in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (1.3.28): 

> *ete cāṁśa-kalāḥ puṁsaḥ kṛṣṇas tu bhagavān svayam* 
> *indrāri-vyākulaṁ lokaṁ mṛḍayanti yuge yuge* 
> 
> All of the above-mentioned incarnations are either plenary portions or portions of the plenary portions of the Lord, but Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the original Personality of Godhead. All of them appear on planets whenever there is a disturbance created by the atheists. The Lord incarnates to protect the theists. 

Significantly, the Sanskrit word *tu* (but) lends important emphasis as in, “But—out of all other incarnations and forms of the Lord—Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the self-sufficient Supreme Lord.” 

Lord Brahmā, the creator demigod (who is born from a lotus springing from the navel of Lord Viṣṇu), sings in his Śrī Brahmā-saṁhitā: govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi. “I worship Govinda—Kṛṣṇa—the primeval Lord.” Govinda (literally, “One who gives pleasure to the cows and the senses”) is a popular name of Kṛṣṇa, and the Supreme Lord is twice addressed as such by Arjuna in the Bhagavad-gītā. Śrī Kṛṣṇa Himself explains that He personally is the divine origin of Viṣṇu to Arjuna with the words ādityānām ahaṁ viṣṇuḥ: “Among Ādityas, I am Viṣṇu.” (Bg 10.21) Śrī Kṛṣṇa as the Ādi-puruṣa or original Godhead expands into His various forms of Viṣṇu for the creation and maintenance of this unlimited material universe. 

In his Śrī Govinda-virudāvali (2) Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī, the great Vaiṣṇava ācārya in the Gauḍīya sampradāya confirms: 

> O lotus-eyed Supreme Lord Kṛṣṇa, when You wish to enjoy Your pastimes in this material world, You appoint the demigod Brahmā to create a place for them. Then You appoint the demigod Śiva to eventually remove them. 

Here Cāṇakya Paṇḍita invokes all auspiciousness for his nīti-śāstra by offering reverence unto Him who is the source of all demigods, as well as the repository of all common sense and morality. 

Now, having offered due obeisances to the Personality of Godhead, Cāṇakya Paṇḍita states his purpose, explaining the essence of nīti. Nīti does not mean simply “politics” as is often understood. Cāṇakya-nīti is replete with common sense advice for living a fuller life here in this material world, while keeping one eye focused upon spiritual development. In a nutshell, it is Cāṇakya Paṇḍita’s expressed wish that we seize the situation at hand, assuring future progress in both the here and hereafter. Life’s ultimate goal is the achievement of loving service unto the Supreme Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa through the grace of the bona fide spiritual master. This exalted goal of transcendence may be actively pursued by the devotee even if he lives comfortably in this world, by keeping his needs to a minimum and living in compliance with the laws of both man and God. Cāṇakya Paṇḍita shows us how all this and more can be achieved by treading softly yet deliberately. 

The triloka (three worlds) mentioned in this verse are a reference to the three levels of the material universe. Śrīla Prabhupāda writes in his purport to Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (2.6.19): “In the material world, the planetary systems are arranged in three spheres, called triloka, or Svarga, Martya and Pātāla, and all of them constitute only one fourth of the total sandhinī energy.”

Since the lifespans of the denizen of Svarga last for many millions of years, those demigods who live there may think of themselves as amara (never-dying). The vast array of comforts at their disposal makes sensual enjoyment a priority over the proper quest for spiritual emancipation, which is attained only through service to the highest authority. The ready abundance of sense gratification in those heavenly regions is the cause of forgetfulness of our eternal constitutional position as subordinates of the Supreme Lord Viṣṇu or Kṛṣṇa. In Naraka (the hellish regions), suffering is so acute that liberation becomes impossible as past misdeeds are expunged through painful punishment at the hands of the Yamadūtas. These middle worlds or “earths” are the ideal “launching pads” for the devotee in search of liberation. Therefore, here and now we must undertake a thorough study of Cāṇakya-nīti to vouchsafe not only our present happiness but our eternal salvation. This rare opportunity of human birth, the vehicle for going back to home and back to Godhead, may not soon present itself again. 

Cāṇakya Paṇḍita scribed his nīti-śāstra some twenty-five hundred years ago, well into Kali-yuga, or within the present age of quarrel and discord. As we will find throughout all authorized literatures—the revealed scriptures—worship of Lord Viṣṇu or Kṛṣṇa is the recommended process for freeing the fettered jīva soul from the shackles of karma in his urgent quest for spiritual awakening. In Kali-yuga, worship of the Absolute Godhead is performed by the chanting of His holy names. 

To spread this worship of Kṛṣṇa through the chanting of His holy names, Lord Kṛṣṇa advented Himself in the fifteenth century in the village of Māyāpur, West Bengal, as Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu. In this divine appearance the Lord spread the movement of saṅkīrtana, the congregational public chanting of the great mantra for deliverance, the mahā-mantra. 

There are many different kinds of mantras for different Vedic sacrifices or yajñas such as marriage, laying foundations, and other auspicious occasions. Many mantras exist also for the propitiation of the devatās, resorted to by short-sighted persons in search of material gain. Ultimately, however, all forms of worship are meant for the adoration of the Supreme Personality of Godhead Śrī Kṛṣṇa as indicated by Cāṇakya Paṇḍita here in the first verse. 

This Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra is known as the mahā (great) mantra because in one fell swoop it settles the affairs of all other mantras. In The Journey of Self-Discovery Śrīla Prabhupāda explains: 

> The Sanskrit word mantra is a combination of two syllables, man and tra. Man means ‘mind,’ and tra means ‘deliverance.’ Therefore a mantra is that which delivers you from mental concoction, from hovering on the mental plane. So if you chant this mantra— 
> Hare Kṛṣṇa Hare Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa Hare Hare 
> Hare Rāma Hare Rāma Rāma Rāma Hare Hare
> —very soon you’ll find that you are coming from the darkness to the light. 

Among all the eighty-four lakhs (8,400,000) species of life recorded in the Vedic literature, man alone has a mind which he must use for spiritual liberation. The soul encased in the form of a plant, insect or animal species must wait many millions of painful births to once again achieve this human form of life. Therefore, the blessing of a rational mind means that we should energetically pursue the liberation of Kṛṣṇa consciousness before our inevitable date with the Grim Reaper catches us unaware. 

Life is too short to waste in chasing the illusory objects of desire. It is a grave mistake to ruin this rare opportunity of life by submerging the senses in the so-called pleasures of bodily enjoyment that are widely available even to cats and dogs on the street. In the first verse of Śrī Cāṇakya-nīti, the wise paṇḍita turns us toward the goal of life, worship of the Supreme Lord, before turning his attention to the more mundane aspects of nīti-śāstra. He who wishes to become great must serve the greatest and that can be accomplished only through humility. Thus our great paṇḍita shows us the way by bowing his head unto the almighty Viṣṇu before stating vakṣye rāja-nīti-samuccayam: “I shall now describe political ethics.”