#Source/Literature/Spiritual/Śrī-Cāṇakya-Nīti/1/6
#Topics/Money #Topics/Duty/Husband/protect-wife #Topics/Duty/save-soul 

आपदर्थे धनं रक्षेद्दारान् रक्षेद्धनैरपि । 
आत्मानं सततं रक्षेद्दारैरपि धनैरपि ॥६॥

*āpad-arthe dhanaṁ rakṣed 
dārān rakṣed dhanair api 
ātmānaṁ satataṁ rakṣed 
dārair api dhanair api* 

**Save your money against hard times, protect your wife at the sacrifice of riches, but always save your soul even at the cost of your wife and riches.** 

Commentary: 
Often a green disciple expresses a desire to sacrifice himself in order to save the entire world. To which the teacher invariably answers that the only way to save others is to first save oneself. Unless one has elevated himself to the platform of transcendence above the three modes of nature, he can do nothing to extricate others trapped by their own desires. The good wishes of a man fallen with us into the same dark well are of little consequence. He must first climb out and obtain a rope with which to pull us to safety. 

Cāṇakya Paṇḍita advises us to prepare for life’s inevitable turmoils through protecting our wealth and family. But by all means one must first save himself at any cost. A show of renunciation will not save one from the well of material existence. Here and now in Kali-yuga when people are dull-witted and short-lived, we must execute Kṛṣṇa consciousness by chanting the Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra and inviting others to do the same. That is the only hope of extricating ourselves and others. 

This verse also appears in the #Source/Literature/Spiritual/Garuḍa-Purāṇa/1/109/9.