#Source/Literature/Spiritual/Śrī-Cāṇakya-Nīti/1/7
#Topics/Money #Topics/Duty/Husband/protect-wife #Personalities/Lakṣmī-Devi 

आपदर्थे धनं रक्षेच्छ्रीमतां कुत आपदः ।
कदाचिच्चलिता लक्ष्मीः सञ्चितं च विनश्यति ॥७॥

*āpad-arthe dhanaṁ rakṣec 
chrīmatāṁ kuta āpadaḥ 
kadācic calitā lakṣmīḥ 
sañcitaṁ ca vinaśyati* 

**Put aside some wealth in case of a future calamity. Never ask, “Why should a rich man dread hard times?” If Lakṣmī, the goddess of fortune, decides to go elsewhere, your savings will dwindle.** 

Commentary: 
Here Cāṇakya Paṇḍita calls Lakṣmī, the goddess of wealth, by her name Calitā (she who is always moving). Lakṣmī is also called Cañcalā (unsteady), as Cāṇakya Paṇḍita will later write in #Source/Literature/Spiritual/Śrī-Cāṇakya-Nīti/5/20. Wealth, which represents her in this world, never stops moving from one hand to the next. Whenever a clever man acquires wealth, others lay schemes for its plunder. Banks through exorbitant interest rates, governments through excessive taxation, thieves through extortion and common citizens through lawsuits all conspire to reduce a rich man’s fortune to zero. Viṣṇuśarmā laments in his Pañca-tantra, “Coming and going, money is nothing but a headache.” 

Lakṣmī is the wife of Lord Viṣṇu and His association alone is the source of her happiness. Therefore, the means to keep the goddess who governs riches pleased is to see that at least some portion of one’s wealth is engaged in the service of Lord Viṣṇu. There is a modern legend in India about the wealthy Birla family. It is said that three or four generations ago, the grandsire of this family was blessed by a sādhu. The sage told him that his future generations would remain wealthy provided whatever they earned was used in the service of the Lord. Birla was instructed to “never allow the mason’s trowel to rest.” 

Today for the sake of public good, as well as their own, the Birla family has constructed many beautiful temples to Lord Viṣṇu throughout India. We have visited several of the magnificent temples built by the Birlas including: the Lakṣmī-Nārāyaṇa Mandir in Delhi, the Gītā Mandir at Kurukṣetra, the Veṅkaṭeśvara Mandir at Hyderabad and the Śrī Kṛṣṇa Mandir on the Mathura-Vrindavan Road. Neither has the trowel rested. 

Neither wealth nor personal property are ours to hoard ultimately, so to avoid a miser’s fate in Naraka, one’s accumulated assets must be engaged for the pleasure and service of the almighty Viṣṇu. Then Calitā may kindly condescend to make her address our very home once we have dedicated everything to her Lord Mādhava (the dhava or “husband” of mā the “goddess of fortune”). 

In this all-too-short spot life we will be wise to sing in one voice with the great King Kulaśekhara who prays in his Mukunda-mālā-stotra (verse 24): 

> O Mādhava, please do not let me even glance at those whose pious credits are so depleted that they have no devotion for Your lotus feet. Please do not let me be distracted from listening to the worthy narrations of Your pastimes and become interested in other topics. Please, O Lord of the universe, let me pay no attention to those who avoid thinking of You. And let me never be unable to serve You in some menial way, birth after birth.